I'm going to switch the tape here and check the voice what's the weather I got
out there in California? Oh, it's just finished raining and now it's blue skies
and sunshine everything's clear in the mountains, they've got snow on them which
is sort of nice Alright I'm afraid I've got a slight one Okay, we have the tape
rolling on this end
I'm not quite sure what I'm supposed to do with this course. Well what I'll do
is I'll simply ask questions and then you just answer them. Alright. And if you
want to make comments or anything like that that's exactly what we're here for.
Okay. By the way, I got the machine going again.
Okay In The Mote in God's Eye Your co-author Larry Niven And you were trying to
write What I believe you called The epitome of a first contact novel You must
have had to develop Quite a bit of background information For that didn't you?
Yeah we probably have As much material in notes For that book As there is in the
book Not sure what to do with it Anymore Because We had Several notebooks about
civilizations
and histories and rest of it.
In general like developing the Motie culture? Yeah, well we had to come up with a
rationale for why are they that way and how did they get to be that way and so
forth. It was all we started with was an asymmetrical Alien, which was uh
something that larry had left over from a story along that he'd never finished
writing
and i can't work without knowing why things happen i i larry is a lot more able
to believe in six impossible things before breakfast than i am so he can sit
there and write a story that you hadn't really believed it'd happen. I'm not
very good at that. I generally don't, I can't stay interested in something
unless I think it might happen, which means that I have to work out how it could
have happened. So we ended up getting quite a lot of stuff on the subject of the
motive. As far as I can see, they're a fairly self-consistent set of aliens.
Probably there's no such thing, but their evolution could easily have come
about, I think.
Why did you and Niven choose to put Mote in God's Eye in your future history of
the CoDominium? Oh, I don't know. I didn't believe in his future history. His
known space theories has got, in my judgment, hold you to drive a truck through.
I just don't think it can happen. Neither does he, by the way. So, which doesn't
mean it's not interesting, because it is. It's interesting and a lot of fun, but
again, I have this problem of not really being able to do a lot of work on
things that I don't believe in. So we built this around Mars, around the one I'd
already had, and it worked out. How did you put together the CoDominium? No, I
don't know. It's about the same way we're putting it together in the real world,
isn't it? It looks now as if the alliance seems to be the United States and
China, but it could just about as easily, given a few changes in the structure
of government in Russia, have been the United States and Russia against China,
couldn't it? Yeah, very possibly. And in fact, that was a very logical way for
things to have gone back in the 60s when the Chinese were running around trying
to tear the world apart, you may remember. Yes? They've got reasonable and the
Russians didn't, as it happened, but it could just as easily have gone the other
way. So really you took and extrapolated our existing political situation. Yeah,
well, I'm not convinced it won't happen yet, of course. I mean, Resendez's got
to go out of business one of these days, and who knows who takes over over
there. They don't know. Why should we know? I don't suppose there's anybody in
the world who knows who's going to be in charge when Brezhnev goes out of
business, right? Right Including Brezhnev
The United States at least has got a certain amount of stability in that you can
make a fairly short list of people who are likely to be president and the
mechanism by which they get there is fairly well known The mechanism by which
you get to be the unanimous choice of the Russian people to be their fearless
leader is not really known even to the Russians, is it? Not from what I can
tell. Well, you know, Beria thought he had it set up at one point, and his gun
stuck in his pocket, quite literally. They had a shootout at a cabinet meeting,
and he lost. So you take the coefficient of friction of a gunfight against a
wool suit and you follow that in as one of the important variables of human
history, right? Right. Since if Berea had been in charge heaven knows what
happened I suspect a code of minium would have come about if Berea had taken
over instead of Khrushchev.
He was just a cynical power broker I doubt that he believed in very much of
anything.
You have a background in political science, don't you? Well, among others, you
guys got, I've
noticed in your work you do have, you base some of your story around the
political intrigue that goes on.
Yes, I'm not sure I understand why that called for comment. No, I was just
making a comment. Back to a better question.
How did the mechanics of collaborating with another author like Niven work?
Well, you know, we get asked that so often that I don't really feel much like
talking about it anymore. Well, we've gone through this 150 times at every
convention everywhere else. The best thing I can say is we just do it, you know?
Okay. How about an hour? You sit down and you write the book, and some people
work together and some can't. Okay. How about getting some background
information on you then? Okay. Yeah, well, I used to write books before I took
up Saving the Space Program for a living. It seems to be what I'm doing lately
is I'm sitting here with the telephone glued in my ear. Just before you called,
I said I've been on the phone in Washington for two hours. Yesterday all day.
We're running around trying to rebuild the space program and still live within
the budget cuts. It's not easy to do. I'm chairman of a citizen's advisement.
I'm working on some plans for the administration, but that doesn't mean any
guarantee that they're going to take our advice. We have a problem right now in
that the administration wants to chop back the budget, which you can, certainly
they've got to do. The country cannot go on with it. At the same time, if they,
if we don't keep up some investments in high technology, we're not going to have
anything to live off of. You've got to invest something once in a while, you
know. And unfortunately, the structure of the government and the tax situation
and the rest of it is such that you are not going to get private investment in
things as inherently risky as space technology because they don't let you keep
any of the profits. Profit's a nasty word nowadays, so who wants to risk
everything on something that you can't win on? So you're going to have to have
government research until they change some of the laws having to do with the tax
structure. and if we don't do that then I guess we'll sit here and become we're
already an underdeveloped nation and our major export is agriculture we're
beginning to import high technology we're buying airplanes from overseas now can
you imagine that eastern airlines is now flying a thing called the airbus which
is made in Europe american domestic airlines are flying foreign airplanes we're
importing computers and we're going to be doing more of that pretty soon We're
an underdeveloped country If we don't start doing some investment We're going to
stay that way So That's what I have been doing For the last couple of weeks And
which is why I don't have My Line of thoughts on the subject of science fiction
Because I'm still sitting here In the eye of a storm Trying to Balance about 35
different balls in the air and get a rational program for high-technology
investments. You know, you talked about a lot of those same things in your book
A Step Further Out, didn't you? Yeah, right. Yeah, that's one reason why I seem
to be involved in doing some of these things and being in charge of a... not in
charge, but sort of ringmaster to a fairly large group of scientists and
engineers
is because of that book. attracted a certain amount of attention. Yeah. In that
book, you state that our, I guess, destiny is mankind, is linked to our
expanding ourselves into space. Yeah, well, as I said in a step further out, and
I've said in other columns and other places, how long is the future? We
presented this, peleasoni and I presented this in a paper to an annual meeting
of the American Association of Advancement of Science, we think of it as a
reasonably important philosophical question. How long is the future? If it's the
way Meadows and Forrester and the limits to growth people think, it's only a
couple of hundred years, then there is no point in worrying about it, and we
might as well eat, drink, and be merry, right? But if, on the other hand, the
future is, another a billion generation, 100 billion years, then we are not the
same species as an outfit that's going to live another 200 years, are we? And if
mankind's future is 100 billion years, and there's no reason why it should not
be 100 billion years, then we're going to have to outlive the Earth and indeed
outlive the Sun and the solar system. We may even have to outlive this galaxy.
Now, there is nothing in principle that keeps us from doing that. I know of
nothing that could stop us other than ourselves. I've said this a lot of times,
but don't know how you can't say it too often. One of the most ironic things
that ever happened was that just after we went to the moon, they held in
Stockholm a conference whose theme title was Only One Earth and that's insane we
don't live on only one Earth, we live if we want to in a system that's got nine
planets and I used to say 38 moons, but now I think it's up to about 50 and a
million asteroids and a million comets that's a lot of resources out there plus
an enormous thermonuclear generator, which the Environmental Protection
Association would never let you activate that thermonuclear generator out there.
It's far too dangerous. We call it the sun.
If we're going to have a hundred billion-year future, we've got to get off this
ball, and we better do it pretty quick because it's fairly obvious that if we
stay cooked up here on it long enough, we're going to do something to ourselves
that'll keep us from going out there. so that's where some of us like me seem to
get a little shrill about it sometimes there's a feeling of urgency here because
right now we have the resources who knows how long we'll have them yeah i was
wondering is there some sort of timetable that we're sort of set into and
getting into space well i don't know what you mean by timetable set into who
would set it Well, are there any sort of resources, restrictions, that would
allow us to get into space now, but maybe not later on? Pure population
pressures. If you believe in the limits to growth model, we don't have very many
more generations of wealth. if you believe those models you're going to have
there are tremendous pressures to widely distribute the capital at the moment
western civilization is a fairly wealthy island in the middle of a pretty large
sea of poverty there are enormous pressures to sort of redistribute the wealth
and if you do then everybody is more or less miserable. There will be very
little wealth. Now, it's unlikely we're going to actually do that because very
few people really popperize themselves voluntarily. But on the other hand,
that's a pretty ripe situation for breeding wars, bringing about the Code of
Indian, by the way. My suspicion is that the United States and the Soviet Union
would rather allow to keep the so-called third world countries from
impoverishing them, then you see what I'm getting at? Genuine foreign aid is...
The United States has a fairly good record of generosity on that, but it is
still fairly small compared to our national budget. We do not give until it
hurts much, nor are we likely to, nor do I think we should, because if we
impoverish ourselves no one will have the resources to go to space that's a very
expensive proposition going to space right right it takes a peculiar combination
of extra wealth educated people high talent machine shops and resources and and
the determination by somebody to do it all of those things have to come together
at the same time and that just seems sufficiently fragile to me in fact the
whole civilization seems fairly fragile to me Roberto Vaca wrote a pretty good
book called The Coming Dark Age in which he discusses a number of fairly
catastrophic scenarios starting with, I don't know, widespread power failures in
which Western civilization just essentially sort of collapses back into a level
approximating the, I don't know, 1900 to 1920 era Everybody's reasonably well
off But nobody's got a lot And there certainly isn't enough to go to space A lot
of autonomously small communities Living off the land counters and so forth Is a
considerable decrease in population As he says Going off and living in the
country In small towns without modern convenience And everything is the sort of
thing People do now for fun But it's not very amusing as a way of life but it
may well be the way of life. You can easily see this comic. Larry and I wrote a
book called Lucifer's Hammer about a natural disaster that can bring about much
the same kind of result. True, that's a rare one. I doubt to you that the
world's going to be whammed with a comet, but on the other hand, Alvarez at
Berkeley, the physicists, Nobel Prize physicists at Berkeley, has just come up
with a fairly convincing proof But that's what happened to the dinosaurs about
100 million years ago is that the Earth really did get whammed with something
big and it killed them all off. And furthermore, he seems to have demonstrated
that it happens about every 100 million years. And the last one happened 100
million years ago, which doesn't mean it's going to happen this year. But I can
think of a lot of things, from wars to just general disorganization. We keep
building bureaucratic structure until we can't support the weight of it any
longer. That would use up all the resources that might take us to space, and if
they're gone, how do you get there?
The interesting, I mean, space is expensive. Each Apollo shot costs almost 15
days' supply of cigarettes. The amount of money that was spent on an Apollo
would have kept the United States in liquor for a whole week.
It's expensive.
It's not very expensive compared to a lot of things we do, but it's still
expensive.
Yes, sir. Okay, I was making sure that you were finished. I liked your gentle,
somewhat gentle sarcasm there about the liquor and the cigarettes. That was
nice.
Even though there are some restrictions on us, you've talked in your articles...
that we can survive, and, if I might quote you... we can survive with style. How
might that be brought about? Well, I can give you some ultimate scenarios if,
but we are trying to convince present administration of them, for essentially
the same amount of money we're spending on the space program now, redirected
slightly, and with a little added to it, it doesn't take much. I'll give you the
following scenario we could have by 1988 a space industrial park which is
essentially a housekeeping satellite that has industrial facilities and power
and which
private companies could go up and put their own modules onto it to make things
and I'll give you some ideas of things you can make in space you can't make is
the yields on ethical drug processes are enormous in space. And some drugs like
uricanase are worth a million dollars a kilogram. You can make those in fairly
large quantities in space because you get perfect mixing and you get good
temperature controls. And there's all kinds of reasons why space turns out to be
a good place to do certain very high-value intrinsically low-yield chemical
processes. you can get steels that are thousands of times better than they are
on Earth turbine blades, magnets people talk about ball bearings it's not so
clear that you can actually profitably manufacture ball bearings in space
because you can make them on Earth foam steels ways of making steel beams that
are shot through with air bubbles in such a way that you or I could pick one of
them up, a thing ten feet long by foot thick. You can carry it around with you,
but it's just about as strong as if it were solid. That sort of thing. Very long
carpet quizzle. There are a lot of products that we are fairly certain would be
profitable, but fairly certain is not good enough that anybody is going to risk
going to all the expense of doing that by themselves. But if you've got already
the facilities so that you're only having to spend, the private companies only
having to spend the marginal cost of this of adding their own module onto it and
paying some rent to the, you sent to the government as a landlord. Then it
becomes a much more attractive proposition, particularly if you give them some
decent tax breaks. Now, this can all be in place by 1988, and by the year 2000
we can be manufacturing things in space from materials taken from mines on the
moon, and all this at a level of U.S. expenditure that is not large compared to
what we're doing now. It's in the order of maybe $10 or $12 billion a year.
Small potatoes. Not, you know. The United States spent like 5% of its national
budget over a period of 10 years on the Panama Canal. And I think everybody
believes that was a good thing to do. We did well by doing good. We don't have
to spend anything like that. Two and a half percent of our national budget on
space over the next 20 years could probably make the whole world rich. Certainly
could keep us fabulously wealthy. Because you were talking about, when you begin
to manufacture things using power from space and materials from the moon, You're
talking about actual new wealth, something that has never existed on this planet
before. You're actually bringing wealth to this planet. And that's quite a
thing. It is all very possible. I mean, it's not dreams, it's not fantasy,
there's nothing ridiculous about it. You have a permanent moon base by the year
2000, you begin to get lunar colonies, I suspect that people would choose to
live there. Some will, some won't, some will. I'm sure I could find 500 highly
qualified families that would be willing to move to the moon tomorrow, knowing
they'd never come back, and very qualified people. In fact, I think very
seriously about doing it myself. It's a new frontier, and there are always
people who like frontier atmospheres. from there the takeoff is clear there's no
going back from that and we have then ensured that there is no single disaster
that wipe out the whole human race we've taken a pretty good step towards our
fulfilling our national destiny of the human race of building our hundred
billion year future and I would think that doing something like that would be
attractive to the president. My suspicion is that the statesman who put us in
his face permanently would be remembered a lot longer than Isabella the Great
and Prince Henry the Navigator. I mean, it would literally be remembered through
billions of years of human history. the man who put us permanently into space,
along with John Kennedy.
This seemed to me like a fairly attractive proposition for some statesmen.
And it does not seem to me like an unpopular idea with the public. Look at the
sales of the, what, Star Wars is still the biggest moneymaker of all time?
Movie? Star Trek is still on in syndication 12, 14 years after the... This is
ridiculous. There's no science fiction books. I've got books in print that have
been going around for 10, 12 years, and I'm a relative newcomer to the field.
There are some science fiction books in print that are 30 years old. Now, who
won the Pulitzer Prize for literature 12 years ago? I bet his book's not in
print.
if you're not talking about something that's unpopular with the people in this
country. I think high technology is very popular, and if you look at the sales
of science magazines now, everywhere you turn around, there's a new science
magazine. It would seem to me that here's a marvelous opportunity for somebody
to go out and do well by doing good, become one of the most famous people in
history by doing something that that is politically very popular. God knows it
didn't hurt John Kennedy any.
Yeah well I definitely hope you're right.
You've speculated about several different types of I guess you would call
launching systems for rockets, and one of them is the laser launch system. I
believe you wrote the first story that concerned itself with that. That's
probably true. Where did that idea come from? Where was it developed? A fellow
named Kentrowitz, who's, by the way, Kentrowitz is on the board of the Alpha
Society, along with people like Mari Minsky and Robert Heinlein. and I strongly
recommend the Alpire Society to keep it, by the way. I think Cantrewitz first
came up with that idea at ABCO Everett a couple of years ago. And then a fellow
named, two engineers, one of them named Peary, and I don't remember the other
one I'm sorry to say,
did some development work on the concept and have actually flown some little
models using lasers as power sources. The laser sits on the ground. It's the
kind of system, it's something like it was only much larger was described in
Mote in God's eye. It looks like a perfectly reasonable system. It certainly would
work on the moon using, you'd have to ablate materials but out of the rocket
chamber. It looks like it ought to work on the Earth. There's nothing, and scale
models have worked. All of the theory works. Again, it's expensive to start
with. There are a lot of ways of getting to space other than disintegrating
totem poles.
But you have to first decide that you want to go there. And one of the things
that we in the L5 Society, Citizens Advisory Council, and some of the other
things are trying to convince the administration is that really the business of
NASA should be to develop these new technologies rather than doing spectacular
missions are fine but we need right now some building blocks and technology and
of course you need some missions to keep people interest up in the program but
technologies should be more important than missions and there are a lot of
technologies that ought to be being investigated in, which really are not being
looked at very strongly now because it's in nobody's interest to look at them.
You can't get rich off of them because you're talking about things that won't
happen for, if everything goes well, you can't start making money at them for 10
or 15 years, and there are a few stockholders who invest in things for a 10 or
15-year-old year payoff. There used to be. There used to be. As Milton Friedman
and his son, David, David Friedman is a good friend of mine. We've had this
argument many times. He thinks the government should get the heck out of
everything. And as David points out, that in the last century, there were a lot
of investments that were not expected to mature for 10 or 15, 20 years. But
nowadays, people don't have so much confidence in the future, so they don't. And
if you go to the Harvard School of Business or the Wharton School of Finance or
some of these famous management schools, they teach you management techniques
that really eventuate with you looking at not only the annual report, but the
quarterly report, you know? And as a consequence, it's hard to find anybody
who's interested in investing in something for the next generation, which means
it's practically got to be done by the government. And that used to be, I
thought, the definition of statesmanship anyway, wasn't it? The politician looks
at the next election, the statesman looks at the next generation. probably the
biggest defect of democracy is that we don't have any institutionalized
mechanisms for looking after our grandchildren's welfare and not our kids
aristocracies do, monarchies do, because it's visibly there and a king is
sitting there and he's looking at this kid running around the palace and he's
thinking well that boy's going to have his job one of these days and if I do
certain things it's going to make it very tough on him so I better do something
else so that it won't be so hard on him, but we haven't got anybody who thinks
that way in a democracy, and it just seems to me somebody had better start
looking out for the future or there ain't going to be one.
Or by the time that they do, it might be too late to do anything about it. Well,
that's the scary thing, of course, is how long will we have this fabulous
wealth? Right now we have resources all over the place. It's just, you know, we
can afford it easily. I'm not kidding when I say that
or let me raise the liquor tax by 50% and put all of that into the space program
and I can make the country so bloomin' rich that you can probably do away with
taxes in another generation. That's the ridiculous part about it is that you're
talking about sources of new wealth that never happened before. The nearest
analogy I can think of is Alaska. Well, they're sitting on so much oil, they're
abolishing all state taxes, and now they're trying to figure out what else to do
with the money, you know. They don't need to worry about it. The federal
government will figure out some way to take it away from them. And they'll spend
it for nothing, throw it away, never invest anything anymore. Terrifying. But
you're sitting on what amounts to a goldman. There's a moon out there. There is
a whole planet of resources. You know, the space is raining soup. It's just a
matter of going out and doing a little development and picking up some soup
bowls. But it's not fast return on investment. It's not something I can put my
money in now and go cash out a year from now. It's something I put it in, and my
kids will come out well. But somewhere, shouldn't we be doing some of that? It
took 15 years to build the Panama Canal. Wasn't it worth doing?
Very good point. Could you hold for just a second, please? Well, yeah, we're
going to wrap this up pretty quick. Yes, sir.
Hello?
Back with you, sir. Yeah. Okay. Yeah, let's get in a little bit to King David's
spaceship, and then we can go ahead and wrap it up here.
All right. All right. Are you ready? Mm-hmm. All right. You seem to have an
interest in medieval cultures. You used them in the Janissaries and in King
David's spaceship. Where did you get the interest in medieval cultures? Well, I
did a lot of work in history getting my doctorate in clinical science, and I've
always been sort of interested in these things. My friend Paul Anderson once
called me a 14th century liberal because some interest I've had in the high
middle ages. Those were times when people felt more integrated into their
culture and loyalties were not what was it in the song in good King Charlie's
Golden Days when loyalty no harm meant they're nice things to write about and I
think I see some signs of a kind of return to feudal institutions we've built a
number of them in this country they're not normally recognized as feudal
institutions but a labor union certainly is as an example certain structures of
corporate loyalty and associations of that kind things that institutions and in
many cases people that stand between you and an all-powerful government it's a
lot easier to be loyal to things like that a lot of problems we've had in this
country tended to cut all of the ties of loyalty between citizens so that you
end up with with the only thing that you're supposed to have any loyalty to is
this nebulous national government in Washington, which acts in such a
contemptible manner quite often that it's pretty hard for you to work up any
great enthusiasm for.
That's part of it. Part of it has always fascinated me a little bit as to the
conflict of cultures. What happens if you take somebody with modern ideas and
throw them into a situation that there's not easy of these type of structures.
That's mostly it.
Yes, in your writing in King David's Spaceship and also I guess in the
Codominium future history Ya! They're all set in the same. They're all set in
the same future history then. You chose empires as the type of government that
would prevail Why is that so? Well, empire seems to me to be the most normal
form of human government in the sense that it is almost certainly the, until
this century was the most common one. Nationalistic kingdoms or nationalistic
tribal government of one kind or another in which the loyalties are basically to
people like me tend to be pretty brutal. things, if you're not, if you're one of
the outsiders. It seemed to me that one of the most brilliant inventions of
mankind, and which we have had for a long time, its origins are really kind of
lost in antiquity. We have some legends about them. Cyrus the Great, a few
people that have been this, the development of a mechanism by which people can
actually have loyalties that cut across tribal and familial clan type of
grounds. Now, democracies theoretically have that, but in practice they don't
seem to generate it very much. They sometimes do, but they're fairly unstable.
At least they have been. Wealthy republics have historically not lasted very
long. We've just about got the record. And, you know, there's some doubt about
us, isn't it? Whether we'll remain a republic or remain wealthy, now you can
make a case for saying the characteristic form of human government is the empire
and the characteristic size of an empire is that it grows until it runs up
against another one now you make case against that too but if you look at human
history that certainly is a proposition that is defensible that's point one
secondly it's very hard to see how you can have an interstellar civilization
that isn't something like that. You might have a council or something. You've
got to have, however, something at the center which has a fairly automatic means
of succession to get from the... because you're not going to have elections
spread out over star systems that are separated by years of travel time. And,
again, you look back and, well, have we ever had any governments that were that
way? And yes we have and in every case they tended to the imperial form you had
the Roman system and you had the British system of the last century and the
British one deliberately went from a monarchical tribal kind of government
Victoria of England to to a frank model of the late days of the Roman Republic
or the early days of the Roman Empire. I mean, it was deliberately modeled after
it even. Queen becoming the Queen Empress.
I don't know of any other systems that have done this. I mean, that have endured
for any great length of time, and which were spread across many cultures and
fascism.
So that you could almost say that what I have put in those books is a very
conservative projection of what life can be like. I understand that it's a
fairly radical looking one to people who have been brought up as American kids
are brought up with almost no sense of history. and in fact almost a religious
avoidance of the subject of history but given much exposure to things historical
I think the question would have been the other way around you would wonder you
would ask what else you could have put there if you were trying to have a
civilization that spans many stars and whose communications were long in time
Yes, I do. Now, a different kind of culture would eventuate, though, and suspect
if you had instantaneous communication, but I very carefully excluded that
possibility, as indeed the universe seems to exclude that possibility.
Okay, yeah, with instantaneous communications that would obviously make other
forms possible. maybe not likely but it'd make them possible you may argue of
course that the difficulties of holding disparate groups together are
sufficiently severe that it won't happen and that you'll have maybe a solar
system or even a planet the natural size of a political unit and there won't be
any real So, you know, and nothing larger than that will exist, to which I can
only say that that's quite possibly the case, but at the same time, if you've
got, if something else came into being, it would then have almost no
competition, would it? You see what I mean? If something did evolve, a mechanism
that could be bigger than that, then it would almost automatically grow until it
had encompassed everything around it. And that, in fact, is essentially the
history of the Cote of Men, and in the Empire that grew from it.
To some extent, political units grow—are dependent in large amount upon... You
know, Ortega y Gasi put it very nicely in the Revolts of the Masses when he
said, in the last analysis, political authority rests upon the shoulders of the
junior officers.
If you've got the lieutenants and captains on your side, you can pretty well,
dang near, do anything you want. And if you don't, you can't. Because they're
the ones that the troops usually obey. The troops don't really care that much
about the generals. But they'll usually follow their own sergeants, and their
sergeants will usually follow their own officers. Well, if that's the case,
you're talking about a fairly restricted group, which is that there's young
people typically at least up until now at least young men-in fact at the ages of
18 to 25 and their psychology is fairly easily known and the mechanisms by which
you get them to be loyal to people and institutions and so forth have been
studied over the course of a long course of history, you know, in courses that
they now teach called Military Psychology and Leadership, which they used to
teach. They don't teach that anymore nowadays. Nowadays, in the modern army, all
these guys are supposed to be technicians, and nobody seems to know anything
about leading troops, which is a dreadful mistake, but that's what they'll be.
So that it all tends towards personal royalties, and once again, historically,
royal families if they've acted in a fairly intelligent way it tended to be able
to build fairly strong loyalties
yeah By the way I say typically male because I think women are too smart to be
fooled by a lot of the tricks that have been developed by men and you you get
women to fight for their houses but to go out and get killed for a banner or a
flag and a song is it's easier to talk young men into that than it is to talk
young ladies into it
I think you're correct they're smart enough in many ways and if you want to go
into sociobiology on it it would be enormously surprising to me to discover that
5 million years of pre-civilizational history has produced such disparate
character traits in all the other, between the sexes of all the other mammalian
species except us? No one in his right mind would suppose that tomcats have the
same
temperament as tabby cats, right? I mean, nobody believes that. Everybody knows
better. Nobody believes that male dogs and female dogs have the same temperament
or is equally trainable or anything else. But we are supposed nowadays to
believe that of human beings. Well, maybe, but that's a surprising fact if true,
that temperamentally our sexes are the same when they are not of any other
mammalian group that I know of. I just have one more question, sir. Let me shut
the machine down for a second.